---
title: "Some Concepts in Medium-Frequency Trading Strategies"
date: 2025-08-14
---

# Some Concepts in Medium-Frequency Trading Strategies

Today’s Blog is a brief note covering topics such as how HFT actions can affect markets and some concepts in low-latency trading. Although I haven’t engaged in low-latency trading, I recently read some concepts, and i think these descriptive knowledge can still be quite helpful when trying to understand market competitors. 

**Latency** generally includes Order submission latency, Order status latency, Market data latency 

Typical ranges:

- **HFT (High-Frequency Trading):** < 1 ms
- **MFT (Medium-Frequency Trading):** > 1 ms but < 20 ms
- **LFT (Low-Frequency Trading):** > 20 ms

**Common Setups Related to Latency**

- **Colocation** – placing servers physically close to an exchange’s data center.
- **Extranet connections**
- **Direct market data feeds** – like ITCH feeds, which are faster than SIP feeds.

Certain strategies employed by HFT firms are detrimental to the medium-frequency trader’s ability to generate revenue. 

**Front-running:** Placing trades ahead of MFTs trading on best bid and ask prices, which reduces the price quote improvement opportunities that MFTs want.

**Ticking strategy:**  when market has more than 2 ticks spread, HFTs thinks there is a potential uptrend in next few milliseconds, bid a tick higher above the best bid first, and then sell quickly later in predicted uptrend. HFT is a liquidity taker in front-running but a liquidity provider in ticking.

Small spread would be less profitable. And high volatility may make this way less profitable, but it depends. Another ticking strategy is sub-penny ticking related to dark pools.  

**Ratio trade :** Ratio trade can be more profitable, and a one-tick spread is enough, but it requires pro-rata priority matching instead of time priority. It also requires an imbalance in the trend.

**Spoofing:** Spoofing is usually illegal and considered market manipulation. It involves placing a large order at the best bid and a small sell order at the best ask (or vice versa). The price appears to move, but only creates an illusion or impression. The trader then sells the small order and immediately cancels the large order, causing panic selling, which allows them to cover their short position later.

**Stop Hunting:** Stop hunting occurs when stop orders cluster around key levels, such as round numbers or other important price points, often influenced by social media or analysts. an HFT might clear buy orders around a support level and place large sell orders below this level, triggering stop-losses. This strategy is not exclusive to HFTs; other market participants can also engage in stop hunting.

**Hide and light orders:** HFTs use hid and light orders to earn rebates and stay first in line without price routed to match with NBBO.

There are certain Choice of Order Types can make MFTs get a better situation.

**IOC order ( immediate or cancel order) :**  it can prevent adverse selection and toxic order flows. 

In adverse selection, slower traders’ limit orders either go unfilled because faster participants (e.g., HFTs) front-run the order, or get filled when the market is moving against them. Informed HFTs likely have an advantage, and their decision not to engage in front-running may be due to better strategic considerations.

**Intermarket Sweep Orders (ISOs)**

Intermarket Sweep Orders (ISOs) are a type of stock market order that allows traders to buy or sell large quantities of shares across multiple market centers simultaneously. NBBO is slow and has latency. ISOs enable traders to satisfy the NBBO across multiple venues while leaving other resting orders on local order books unaffected.

Some researchers have suggested that ISOs can contribute to market instability and may trigger flash crash, causing quotes to fall to stub quote levels. There is also Day ISO, which will remain for the day if not completely fulfilled.

**Dark Pools**

Dark pools are private trading venues where large orders can be executed without immediately displaying them to the public market. Unlike lit markets, where orders are matched at the NBBO or worse, dark pools often allow trades to be executed at the midpoint price or better.

Some high-frequency traders (HFTs) may attempt midpoint manipulation, as midpoints can be pushed in the market orderbook first and they get a better dark pool midpoint price later. Also, with access to faster direct feeds, HFTs can anticipate movements in the midpoint and place market orders in dark pools to gain an advantage. Dark pools may also be subject to latency arbitrage and information leakage—either through HFT partners or the owner’s own trading desks.

To counter abuse in dark pools, several measures can be applied, such as ranking dark pools by calculating the adverse effects. adverse effects can be measured by analyzing differences in hypothetical PnL between filled and unfilled orders.

**Calculate Order Flow**

Calculating order flow means determining aggressive and passive orders from trade data. Order flow cannot be precisely obtained from order book snapshots due to latency. Faster markets make correct identification even more challenging. There are several commonly used rules to calculate order flow:

1. **Tick Rule:** If the trade price is less than the previous trade, it is classified as a sell market order; if it is higher, it is a buy market order.
2. **Quote Rule:** Uses the mid-point of the bid and ask prices to classify trades.
3. **Lee-Ready Algorithm:** If the trade price equals the mid-point, apply the tick rule to classify it, else use the quote rule.
4. **BVC :** using bars to calculate, first get pct_change and then zscore along with Gaussian CDF.


**Reference:**  Quantra in quantinsti.com
